Hello, everyone, welcome back to the 10 days of JavaScript, here we are in day number four.
And in this lesson, we are going to learn about a raise.
So what in the world is an array?
Well, let's ask ourselves in the English language, how would we use the word array?
Well, for example, a car dealership might say that they have cars available in a wide array of colors,
and that just means they have a lot of available colors.
So when we hear the word array, just think of a collection.
It doesn't matter what the collection is of just that there's a collection made up of multiple items.
That's enough of an introduction.
Now, let's jump right into the code in the action and have you roll up your sleeves and create your
first array with JavaScript code.
So go ahead and open up code pen again.
You can create a new pen or just use the same pen from the previous lesson if you still have it open.
So in a previous lesson, we learned how to store a single value like this.
Let my favorite number equal seven.
However, what if we wanted to store multiple numbers so plural a collection of numbers?
Well, we could do this on a new line.
I would say let my favorite numbers equal.
The variable name doesn't really matter.
You could make anything up, but let's set it to equal square brackets.
If you're not familiar with these characters, it's directly to the right of the PECKY.
So it's the same key as the curly bracket key, except this time we do not hold down shift.
So in JavaScript, a pair of square brackets like this is how you create an array inside the square
brackets.
We can include multiple values.
So the number nine and then comma and I can include another value, maybe two comma, a comma three
comma, seven comma.
For the idea is that an array is a collection.
Right.
So now this variable, my favorite numbers is storing a collection of all of these numbers in memory
and arrays are not limited to just numbers.
So on a new line, we could say let my words equal square brackets for an array and then we could say
read comma, orange, comma, yellow.
OK, so this array is a collection of strings of text.
This arrays a collection of numbers, or we could even create an array that is a collection of objects.
So on a new line, we could say let my pets equal an array.
So square brackets and then instead of including a simple number or a string of text within the empty
pair of square brackets, let's include an object.
So this pair of curly brackets could represent a pet and then we could include another pet by just saying
comma and include another object.
OK, and then just as a quick example, we could build out these objects.
So within the first pair of curly brackets, our first object could be a cat and we could give it a
property of name.
So name calling and give it a value of miaows a lot after the quotes for meows a lot we could say comma
and include another property species colon and maybe give it a value of cat.
Right.
So we practiced this object syntax in our previous lesson from this curly bracket to this curly bracket
represents an independent entity or an object.
In this case, a cat named Meow is a lot.
OK, so this is the first pet in the array.
Then in our second pet within these curly brackets, we could create an object name.
Let's have it be a dog.
So let's give it a name of barks a lot.
After the quotes, comma, because we want another property within this object, Ensay species, Colen
dog, you get the idea.
OK, now let's ask the really important question that you've probably been screaming at your screen
for the last four and a half minutes.
And that is why why would we do this?
Why would we want to create collections of values like this?
Well, the answer is because collections like these, especially collections of objects like this,
this is really no different from how most apps or websites work.
For example, Facebook is really just an array of post objects that you scroll through.
Twitter is really just an array of tweet objects that you scroll through or your email inbox is really
just an array of email objects that you scroll through.
So we had an array of pet objects, but imagine if it was your email inbox instead of name.
Maybe this property would be from and it would have the from email address and then instead of species,
maybe this would be too and then it would have the two email address and then maybe there would be another
property named Body and that would contain the actual email message itself.
The point that I'm trying to make here is that a lot of programming is really just working with arrays.
For example, if you were on Facebook and you posted or created a new post, you're really just adding
a new item to the array of posts.
Or if you were in your email inbox and you deleted an email, you're really just removing an item from
an array.
So right now, why don't we practice adding a new item to one of our existing arrays and also we can
practice removing an item from one of our arrays.
Let's start with adding an item.
So imagine down here we want to write a new line of code that maybe adds the word green to our existing
my words array.
Right.
So as of this moment, the array contains the words red, orange and yellow.
So down here, how can we write a bit of code to programmatically add the word green onto the end of
this collection?
Well, let's begin by working with this variable name.
So it's my words and then a dot to look inside it.
And now, right now, you might be thinking to yourself why a dot isn't a dot or period how we look
inside an object.
And the answer is yes, it is.
An array is actually just a special type of object.
It's not exactly the same type of object as we learned about in our previous lesson, but it's a special
type of object that has access to its own abilities or methods.
And these are abilities and methods that we do not need to add or create ourselves.
But rather these are abilities that the array just has out of the box.
They are provided by the JavaScript language itself.
So, for example, all arrays have access to a method named push.
So we can say my words dot push.
So we are calling this function or method named push, and this is how we can add an item onto the end
of an existing array.
So within the parentheses for this method or function, we can just include an argument of green.
OK, and now how can we test this out?
How can we make sure that the array was actually updated?
Well, in previous lessons, we used the alert annoying pop up to try and test something out.
But now I want to show you something a bit easier to use.
So our JavaScript environment in this case, the Web browser has an object named console and we can
say console, dot, log and anything we include within these parentheses will get output or logged to
the console.
So this is a great way to test your code.
It lets you see your values visually so you can make sure that it's working the way that you expect.
So why don't we log the my words array out to the console so we can see what it contains.
So console dot, log in the parentheses, just say my words, OK, and then how do we actually see the
console?
Well, if you just.
Right.
Click down here in the preview part of Code Pen, I'm going to choose the inspect option.
Remember that opens your developer tools and then just look for the tab named console.
OK, now you might need to make a slight change to your code in order to have code and execute everything
once again.
So maybe get rid of this and just console.
So log the word hello, and then if you check your console, let me make this a bit easier to read there
it can see hello.
OK, so now we can just change this back instead of hello.
What we actually want to log out to the console is are my words variable are array.
So now if we check the console and here we see the contents of our array and noticed the last item is
green, that means that this line of code successfully added green to the end of that array.
And this is cool because we did not need to create a function or method name to push.
The push method is just a native built in part of the JavaScript language that arrays automatically
get access to.
And this actually brings us to one of the neatest aspects of JavaScript.
So in the JavaScript language, almost everything, not everything, but almost everything is actually
an object or at the very least gets treated or interpreted as an object.
So this is not just the case with arrays, but also even simple strings of text or numbers.
Each type of data gets access to its own set of super powers or abilities or we should say, functions
or methods.
So, for example, and this has nothing to do with arrays, but it's important to understanding JavaScript.
So if down here, if we created a variable and named it my name and set it to equal a string of text
in this case, whatever your name is.
Yes, this is just a simple string of text, right?
It does not look like the cat object that we created in our previous lesson.
However, behind the scenes, JavaScript is actually going to treat the string of text as if it was
an object.
And it's actually going to get access to abilities or methods that are specific to strings of text.
So, for example, try this out with me.
We could say console, dot, log and log out our my name variable in the console.
There you can see it.
However, if we wanted all of the letters in our name to be capitalized.
Check this out.
Instead of just my name, we can say my name dot to uppercase.
So strings of text have access to a method or ability named to uppercase.
And then we just include parentheses to run or call that method.
And if I check the console, they we see our name in all capital letters.
And really quick, just for fun, I want to show you that even the number data type gets access to its
own special abilities.
So let me delete these two lines of test code where we said my name equals Brad and let's say let my
number equal seven point eight nine.
So this is just a simple number, right?
It doesn't look like an object.
However, behind the scenes, JavaScript is going to give it access to methods or abilities related
to numbers.
So on a new line, if we log this out to the console console, log my number there we see the number
seven point eight nine.
And now imagine if we wanted to round that to the nearest whole number.
Well, in JavaScript, we could just say my number dot two fixed.
So parentheses to call or run the two fixed method.
And if we check the console, seven point eight nine got rounded up to eight.
Cool.
Now, if the last three minutes did not make perfect sense, that's OK.
It was a bit of a tangent, but the big picture idea is simply that different types of data have access
to different abilities or methods.
Now back to the topic at hand, which is a raise.
So let's delete these two lines of code for my number, OK?
And back on track, we've learned how to add an item to an existing array.
Now let's learn how to remove an item from an array.
So let's imagine that down here, we want to write a new line of code that maybe removes the word orange
from the my words array.
So down here we can just say my words, Dot.
And there is a method named Splice and the splice method lets us remove a particular item from an array
within the parentheses.
We want to pass this method to arguments.
So just as placeholders, I'm going to say A comma B now the first argument is the.
Index of which item you want to get rid of.
So what does that mean?
Well, if we look at our array up here, red, orange, yellow, and each item is represented with a
numerical index.
Now, you might think that red would be one, orange would be two and yellow would be three.
But arrays in JavaScript are zero based, which really just means we start counting at zero instead
of one.
So Red would have an index of zero and then one and then two.
So if our hypothetical goal is to remove orange, Orange has an index of one, right.
Zero one two.
So down here in splice for the first argument, let's say one.
And then the second argument is how many items you want to remove starting from that index.
So we're just going to say, one, we only want to get rid of one item.
And now let's test this out.
Let's see if it's doing what we expect it to do.
So let's log out our array to the console console log and let's just log out my words, our array.
And now if I check the console, perfect, we just have red, yellow, green.
Now, practice makes perfect.
And I know the idea of the numerical index might be confusing.
So instead of removing orange, what if we wanted to get rid of red?
Well, red is the first item, so it has an index of zero.
So down here and splice we would say zero and we still only want to remove one item starting from that
index.
If we check the console, we see that red got removed.
Perfect.
And this concept of the numerical index is also how we can access the value of a particular item in
an array.
So, for example, let's take our my favorite numbers array and let's imagine that we wanted to access
the value of the third item in the collection.
So we know that it's a value of eight.
But if we wanted to access it programmatically down here at the bottom, we could say console log.
And the variable name is my favorite numbers, my favorite numbers.
And then to look up an item in an array by its index, we just include a pair of square brackets after
the array and then we include the numerical index.
So if we wanted the third item, we don't type three because remember, arrays are zero based.
So the third item would be to write zero one two.
So if I checked the console, cool.
There we see the number eight.
If we wanted to get the fourth item from the array, we could just change this from a two to a three.
You get the idea.
Let's practice accessing an item in an array one more time.
Let's imagine that we want to access the species of the second pet in our my pets array of objects.
So we know that that's a value of dog, but how would we access that programmatically?
So down here at the bottom, let's say console log, start with the my pets array square brackets and
we are interested in the second item in the array.
So zero would be the first item, one would be the second item.
This would retrieve us, the entire pet object.
But then we want to look inside that object for the species value.
So if we check the console, cool, there we see dog.
Now let's bring this lesson to a close and explain why arrays are so important.
So in addition to adding and removing items from an array, it's also very easy to make the computer
sort an array alphabetically or sort by some other quality.
Or perhaps most importantly of all, computers are really good at automating tasks.
So once we have a collection or an array, it's super easy to make the computer do something once for
each item in that array, for example, maybe displaying it visually onto the Web page.
And then remember, at the end of our previous lesson, we learned how to do something every time the
user clicked anywhere on the page.
Well, you can imagine that we can watch for clicks on a particular button on the page.
And then in response to that event, we can maybe add an item to an array or remove an item from an
array or sort the array or just work with the array in some interesting way that the user wants.
OK, now, at this point, I do not expect you to be an expert on arrays and you don't need to have
remembered everything in this lesson.
All you need to know is that an array is a collection of items and that arrays have an.
Access to different methods like push and splice that let us manipulate or work with the array, if
that makes even a little bit of sense, then you're on track and you're ready to move on to the next
lesson.
Up next, we are going to learn how to make decisions in our code.
This is going to open up so many doors.
So let's keep things rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.